
## Chapter I — The Science of Deduction (2931 words; 56 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter I The Science of Deduction
  1 Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantel-piece and his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case. Wi
  2 Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance, but custom had not reconciled my mind to it. On the contr
  3 Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had taken with my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced b
  4 “Which is it to-day?” I asked,—“morphine or cocaine?”
  5 He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume which he had opened. “It is cocaine,” he said,—“a seven-per-cen
  6 “No, indeed,” I answered, brusquely. “My constitution has not got over the Afghan campaign yet. I cannot afford to throw any
  7 He smiled at my vehemence. “Perhaps you are right, Watson,” he said. “I suppose that its influence is physically a bad one. I
  8 “But consider!” I said, earnestly. “Count the cost! Your brain may, as you say, be roused and excited, but it is a pathologic
  9 He did not seem offended. On the contrary, he put his finger-tips together and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, li
 10 “My mind,” he said, “rebels at stagnation. Give me problems, give me work, give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most i
 11 “The only unofficial detective?” I said, raising my eyebrows.
 12 “The only unofficial consulting detective,” he answered. “I am the last and highest court of appeal in detection. When Gregso
 13 “Yes, indeed,” said I, cordially. “I was never so struck by anything in my life. I even embodied it in a small brochure with
 14 He shook his head sadly. “I glanced over it,” said he. “Honestly, I cannot congratulate you upon it. Detection is, or ought t
 15 “But the romance was there,” I remonstrated. “I could not tamper with the facts.”
 16 “Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense of proportion should be observed in treating them. The only point
 17 I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been specially designed to please him. I confess, too, that I was irritat
 18 “My practice has extended recently to the Continent,” said Holmes, after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe. “I was
 19 “He speaks as a pupil to his master,” said I.
 20 “Oh, he rates my assistance too highly,” said Sherlock Holmes, lightly. “He has considerable gifts himself. He possesses two
 21 “Your works?”
 22 “Oh, didn’t you know?” he cried, laughing. “Yes, I have been guilty of several monographs. They are all upon technical subjec
 23 “You have an extraordinary genius for minutiæ,” I remarked.
 24 “I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracing of footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaste
 25 “Not at all,” I answered, earnestly. “It is of the greatest interest to me, especially since I have had the opportunity of ob
 26 “Why, hardly,” he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his arm-chair, and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe. “For
 27 “Right!” said I. “Right on both points! But I confess that I don’t see how you arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my
 28 “It is simplicity itself,” he remarked, chuckling at my surprise,—“so absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous; and
 29 “How, then, did you deduce the telegram?”
 30 “Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat opposite to you all morning. I see also in your open de
 31 “In this case it certainly is so,” I replied, after a little thought. “The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest. W
 32 “On the contrary,” he answered, “it would prevent me from taking a second dose of cocaine. I should be delighted to look into
 33 “I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any object in daily use without leaving the impress of his indiv
 34 I handed him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement in my heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible
 35 “There are hardly any data,” he remarked. “The watch has been recently cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts.”
 36 “You are right,” I answered. “It was cleaned before being sent to me.” In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward
 37 “Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren,” he observed, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-l
 38 “That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?”
 39 “Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch is nearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as th
 40 “Right, so far,” said I. “Anything else?”
 41 “He was a man of untidy habits,—very untidy and careless. He was left with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, liv
 42 I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with considerable bitterness in my heart.
 43 “This is unworthy of you, Holmes,” I said. “I could not have believed that you would have descended to this. You have made in
 44 “My dear doctor,” said he, kindly, “pray accept my apologies. Viewing the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten how
 45 “Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get these facts? They are absolutely correct in every particular.”
 46 “Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance of probability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate.”
 47 “But it was not mere guess-work?”
 48 “No, no: I never guess. It is a shocking habit,—destructive to the logical faculty. What seems strange to you is only so beca
 49 I nodded, to show that I followed his reasoning.
 50 “It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take a watch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-poin
 51 “It is as clear as daylight,” I answered. “I regret the injustice which I did you. I should have had more faith in your marve
 52 “None. Hence the cocaine. I cannot live without brain-work. What else is there to live for? Stand at the window here. Was eve
 53 I had opened my mouth to reply to this tirade, when with a crisp knock our landlady entered, bearing a card upon the brass sa
 54 “A young lady for you, sir,” she said, addressing my companion.
 55 “Miss Mary Morstan,” he read. “Hum! I have no recollection of the name. Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson. Don’t go,

## Chapter II — The Statement of the Case (1827 words; 41 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter II The Statement of the Case
  1 Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outward composure of manner. She was a blonde young lady, small, dainty
  2 “I have come to you, Mr. Holmes,” she said, “because you once enabled my employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little
  3 “Mrs. Cecil Forrester,” he repeated thoughtfully. “I believe that I was of some slight service to her. The case, however, as
  4 “She did not think so. But at least you cannot say the same of mine. I can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterly
  5 Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. He leaned forward in his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentra
  6 I felt that my position was an embarrassing one. “You will, I am sure, excuse me,” I said, rising from my chair.
  7 To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me. “If your friend,” she said, “would be good enough to sto
  8 I relapsed into my chair.
  9 “Briefly,” she continued, “the facts are these. My father was an officer in an Indian regiment who sent me home when I was qu
 10 “The date?” asked Holmes, opening his note-book.
 11 “He disappeared upon the 3rd of December, 1878,—nearly ten years ago.”
 12 “His luggage?”
 13 “Remained at the hotel. There was nothing in it to suggest a clue,—some clothes, some books, and a considerable number of cur
 14 “Had he any friends in town?”
 15 “Only one that we know of,—Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the 34th Bombay Infantry. The major had retired some little tim
 16 “A singular case,” remarked Holmes.
 17 “I have not yet described to you the most singular part. About six years ago—to be exact, upon the 4th of May, 1882—an advert
 18 “Your statement is most interesting,” said Sherlock Holmes. “Has anything else occurred to you?”
 19 “Yes, and no later than to-day. That is why I have come to you. This morning I received this letter, which you will perhaps r
 20 “Thank you,” said Holmes. “The envelope too, please. Postmark, London, S.W. Date, July 7. Hum! Man’s thumb-mark on corner,—pr
 21 “That is exactly what I want to ask you.”
 22 “Then we shall most certainly go. You and I and—yes, why, Dr. Watson is the very man. Your correspondent says two friends. He
 23 “But would he come?” she asked, with something appealing in her voice and expression.
 24 “I should be proud and happy,” said I, fervently, “if I can be of any service.”
 25 “You are both very kind,” she answered. “I have led a retired life, and have no friends whom I could appeal to. If I am here
 26 “You must not be later,” said Holmes. “There is one other point, however. Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl
 27 “I have them here,” she answered, producing half a dozen pieces of paper.
 28 “You are certainly a model client. You have the correct intuition. Let us see, now.” He spread out the papers upon the table,
 29 “Nothing could be more unlike.”
 30 “I expected to hear you say so. We shall look out for you, then, at six. Pray allow me to keep the papers. I may look into th
 31 “_Au revoir_,” said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance from one to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in
 32 “What a very attractive woman!” I exclaimed, turning to my companion.
 33 He had lit his pipe again, and was leaning back with drooping eyelids. “Is she?” he said, languidly. “I did not observe.”
 34 “You really are an automaton,—a calculating-machine!” I cried. “There is something positively inhuman in you at times.”
 35 He smiled gently. “It is of the first importance,” he said, “not to allow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities. A
 36 “In this case, however—”
 37 “I never make exceptions. An exception disproves the rule. Have you ever had occasion to study character in handwriting? What
 38 “It is legible and regular,” I answered. “A man of business habits and some force of character.”
 39 Holmes shook his head. “Look at his long letters,” he said. “They hardly rise above the common herd. That _d_ might be an _a_
 40 I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts were far from the daring speculations of the writer. My mind

## Chapter III — In Quest of a Solution (1728 words; 29 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter III In Quest of a Solution
  1 It was half-past five before Holmes returned. He was bright, eager, and in excellent spirits,—a mood which in his case altern
  2 “There is no great mystery in this matter,” he said, taking the cup of tea which I had poured out for him. “The facts appear
  3 “What! you have solved it already?”
  4 “Well, that would be too much to say. I have discovered a suggestive fact, that is all. It is, however, _very_ suggestive. Th
  5 “I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests.”
  6 “No? You surprise me. Look at it in this way, then. Captain Morstan disappears. The only person in London whom he could have
  7 “But what a strange compensation! And how strangely made! Why, too, should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago?
  8 “There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties,” said Sherlock Holmes, pensively. “But our expedition of to-night
  9 I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmes took his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into hi
 10 Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face was composed, but pale. She must have been more than woman i
 11 “Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa’s,” she said. “His letters were full of allusions to the major. He and pap
 12 Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon his knee. He then very methodically examined it all over with hi
 13 “It is paper of native Indian manufacture,” he remarked. “It has at some time been pinned to a board. The diagram upon it app
 14 “It was in his pocket-book that we found it.”
 15 “Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be of use to us. I begin to suspect that this matter may turn
 16 It was a September evening, and not yet seven o’clock, but the day had been a dreary one, and a dense drizzly fog lay low upo
 17 At the Lyceum Theatre the crowds were already thick at the side-entrances. In front a continuous stream of hansoms and four-w
 18 “Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?” he asked.
 19 “I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends,” said she.
 20 He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes upon us. “You will excuse me, miss,” he said with a certain do
 21 “I give you my word on that,” she answered.
 22 He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across a four-wheeler and opened the door. The man who had addressed us
 23 The situation was a curious one. We were driving to an unknown place, on an unknown errand. Yet our invitation was either a c
 24 “Rochester Row,” said he. “Now Vincent Square. Now we come out on the Vauxhall Bridge Road. We are making for the Surrey side
 25 We did indeed get a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with the lamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab
 26 “Wordsworth Road,” said my companion. “Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane. Stockwell Place. Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane. Our que
 27 We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighbourhood. Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by th
 28 “The Sahib awaits you,” said he, and even as he spoke there came a high piping voice from some inner room. “Show them in to m

## Chapter IV — The Story of the Bald-Headed Man (3831 words; 41 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter IV The Story of the Bald-Headed Man
  1 We followed the Indian down a sordid and common passage, ill-lit and worse furnished, until he came to a door upon the right,
  2 “Your servant, Miss Morstan,” he kept repeating, in a thin, high voice. “Your servant, gentlemen. Pray step into my little sa
  3 We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into which he invited us. In that sorry house it looked as out of p
  4 “Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,” said the little man, still jerking and smiling. “That is my name. You are Miss Morstan, of course. And
  5 “This is Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and this is Dr. Watson.”
  6 “A doctor, eh?” cried he, much excited. “Have you your stethoscope? Might I ask you—would you have the kindness? I have grave
  7 I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to find anything amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear,
  8 “You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan,” he remarked, airily. “I am a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to
  9 I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at this callous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter. Mis
 10 “I can give you every information,” said he, “and, what is more, I can do you justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bart
 11 “For my part,” said Holmes, “whatever you may choose to say will go no further.”
 12 I nodded to show my agreement.
 13 “That is well! That is well!” said he. “May I offer you a glass of Chianti, Miss Morstan? Or of Tokay? I keep no other wines.
 14 “When I first determined to make this communication to you,” said he, “I might have given you my address, but I feared that y
 15 “You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto,” said Miss Morstan, “but I am here at your request to learn something which you desire to te
 16 “At the best it must take some time,” he answered; “for we shall certainly have to go to Norwood and see Brother Bartholomew.
 17 “If we are to go to Norwood it would perhaps be as well to start at once,” I ventured to remark.
 18 He laughed until his ears were quite red. “That would hardly do,” he cried. “I don’t know what he would say if I brought you
 19 “My father was, as you may have guessed, Major John Sholto, once of the Indian army. He retired some eleven years ago, and ca
 20 “I very well remember the sensation which was caused by the disappearance of Captain Morstan. We read the details in the pape
 21 “We did know, however, that some mystery—some positive danger—overhung our father. He was very fearful of going out alone, an
 22 “Early in 1882 my father received a letter from India which was a great shock to him. He nearly fainted at the breakfast-tabl
 23 “When we entered his room he was propped up with pillows and breathing heavily. He besought us to lock the door and to come u
 24 “‘I have only one thing,’ he said, ‘which weighs upon my mind at this supreme moment. It is my treatment of poor Morstan’s or
 25 “‘I will tell you how Morstan died,’ he continued. ‘He had suffered for years from a weak heart, but he concealed it from eve
 26 “‘For a long time I sat half distracted, wondering what I should do. My first impulse was, of course, to call for assistance;
 27 “‘I was still pondering over the matter, when, looking up, I saw my servant, Lal Chowdar, in the doorway. He stole in and bol
 28 “At this instant a horrible change came over his expression; his eyes stared wildly, his jaw dropped, and he yelled, in a voi
 29 “We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of the intruder, save that just under the window a single footmark was
 30 The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfully for a few moments. We had all sat absorbed, listening to
 31 “My brother and I,” said he, “were, as you may imagine, much excited as to the treasure which my father had spoken of. For we
 32 “It was a kindly thought,” said our companion, earnestly. “It was extremely good of you.”
 33 The little man waved his hand deprecatingly. “We were your trustees,” he said. “That was the view which I took of it, though
 34 Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurious settee. We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the new
 35 “You have done well, sir, from first to last,” said he. “It is possible that we may be able to make you some small return by
 36 Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his hookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befro
 37 Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidently prearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid p
 38 “Bartholomew is a clever fellow,” said he. “How do you think he found out where the treasure was? He had come to the conclusi
 39 At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one another open-eyed. Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would c
 40 “This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge,” said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, as he handed her out.

## Chapter V — The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge (2615 words; 59 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter V The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge
  1 It was nearly eleven o’clock when we reached this final stage of our night’s adventures. We had left the damp fog of the grea
  2 Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with a very high stone wall topped with broken glass. A single
  3 “Who is there?” cried a gruff voice from within.
  4 “It is I, McMurdo. You surely know my knock by this time.”
  5 There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. The door swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man st
  6 “That you, Mr. Thaddeus? But who are the others? I had no orders about them from the master.”
  7 “No, McMurdo? You surprise me! I told my brother last night that I should bring some friends.”
  8 “He ain’t been out o’ his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have no orders. You know very well that I must stick to regulation
  9 This was an unexpected obstacle. Thaddeus Sholto looked about him in a perplexed and helpless manner. “This is too bad of you
 10 “Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus,” said the porter, inexorably. “Folk may be friends o’ yours, and yet no friends o’ the master’s. H
 11 “Oh, yes you do, McMurdo,” cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. “I don’t think you can have forgotten me. Don’t you remember the
 12 “Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes!” roared the prize-fighter. “God’s truth! how could I have mistook you? If instead o’ standin’ there
 13 “You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of the scientific professions open to me,” said Holmes, laughing. “Ou
 14 “In you come, sir, in you come,—you and your friends,” he answered. “Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict. Ha
 15 Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clump of a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow sa
 16 “I cannot understand it,” he said. “There must be some mistake. I distinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet
 17 “Does he always guard the premises in this way?” asked Holmes.
 18 “Yes; he has followed my father’s custom. He was the favourite son, you know, and I sometimes think that my father may have t
 19 “None,” said Holmes. “But I see the glint of a light in that little window beside the door.”
 20 “Ah, that is the housekeeper’s room. That is where old Mrs. Bernstone sits. She can tell us all about it. But perhaps you wou
 21 He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of light flickered and wavered all round us. Miss Morstan seized
 22 “It is Mrs. Bernstone,” said Sholto. “She is the only woman in the house. Wait here. I shall be back in a moment.” He hurried
 23 “Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come! I am so glad you have come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!” We heard her reiterated r
 24 Our guide had left us the lantern. Holmes swung it slowly round, and peered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-hea
 25 “What a strange place!” she said, looking round.
 26 “It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose in it. I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hil
 27 “And from the same cause,” said Holmes. “These are the traces of the treasure-seekers. You must remember that they were six y
 28 At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto came running out, with his hands thrown forward and terr
 29 “There is something amiss with Bartholomew!” he cried. “I am frightened! My nerves cannot stand it.” He was, indeed, half blu
 30 “Come into the house,” said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way.
 31 “Yes, do!” pleaded Thaddeus Sholto. “I really do not feel equal to giving directions.”
 32 We all followed him into the housekeeper’s room, which stood upon the left-hand side of the passage. The old woman was pacing
 33 “God bless your sweet calm face!” she cried, with an hysterical sob. “It does me good to see you. Oh, but I have been sorely
 34 Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few words of kindly womanly comfort which brought the colour
 35 “Master has locked himself in and will not answer me,” she explained. “All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often l
 36 Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto’s teeth were chattering in his head. So shaken was he that
 37 The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some length, with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right
 38 “There is something devilish in this, Watson,” said he, more moved than I had ever before seen him. “What do you make of it?”
 39 I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. Moonlight was streaming into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shif
 40 “This is terrible!” I said to Holmes. “What is to be done?”
 41 “The door must come down,” he answered, and, springing against it, he put all his weight upon the lock. It creaked and groane
 42 It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory. A double line of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the w
 43 By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house was seated all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoul
 44 “You see,” he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.
 45 In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, “The sign of the four.”
 46 “In God’s name, what does it all mean?” I asked.
 47 “It means murder,” said he, stooping over the dead man. “Ah, I expected it. Look here!” He pointed to what looked like a long
 48 “It looks like a thorn,” said I.
 49 “It is a thorn. You may pick it out. But be careful, for it is poisoned.”
 50 I took it up between my finger and thumb. It came away from the skin so readily that hardly any mark was left behind. One tin
 51 “This is all an insoluble mystery to me,” said I. “It grows darker instead of clearer.”
 52 “On the contrary,” he answered, “it clears every instant. I only require a few missing links to have an entirely connected ca
 53 We had almost forgotten our companion’s presence since we entered the chamber. He was still standing in the doorway, the very
 54 “The treasure is gone!” he said. “They have robbed him of the treasure! There is the hole through which we lowered it. I help
 55 “What time was that?”
 56 “It was ten o’clock. And now he is dead, and the police will be called in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in i
 57 “You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto,” said Holmes, kindly, putting his hand upon his shoulder. “Take my advice, and driv
 58 The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard him stumbling down the stairs in the dark.

## Chapter VI — Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration (3114 words; 77 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter VI Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration
  1 “Now, Watson,” said Holmes, rubbing his hands, “we have half an hour to ourselves. Let us make good use of it. My case is, as
  2 “Simple!” I ejaculated.
  3 “Surely,” said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor expounding to his class. “Just sit in the corner there,
  4 I looked at the round, well-defined muddy discs. “This is not a footmark,” said I.
  5 “It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of a wooden stump. You see here on the sill is the boot-mark,
  6 “It is the wooden-legged man.”
  7 “Quite so. But there has been some one else,—a very able and efficient ally. Could you scale that wall, doctor?”
  8 I looked out of the open window. The moon still shone brightly on that angle of the house. We were a good sixty feet from the
  9 “It is absolutely impossible,” I answered.
 10 “Without aid it is so. But suppose you had a friend up here who lowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, s
 11 “This is all very well,” said I, “but the thing becomes more unintelligible than ever. How about this mysterious ally? How ca
 12 “Yes, the ally!” repeated Holmes, pensively. “There are features of interest about this ally. He lifts the case from the regi
 13 “How came he, then?” I reiterated. “The door is locked, the window is inaccessible. Was it through the chimney?”
 14 “The grate is much too small,” he answered. “I had already considered that possibility.”
 15 “How then?” I persisted.
 16 “You will not apply my precept,” he said, shaking his head. “How often have I said to you that when you have eliminated the i
 17 “He came through the hole in the roof,” I cried.
 18 “Of course he did. He must have done so. If you will have the kindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our resea
 19 He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, he swung himself up into the garret. Then, lying on his face, h
 20 The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one way and six the other. The floor was formed by the rafters, wi
 21 “Here you are, you see,” said Sherlock Holmes, putting his hand against the sloping wall. “This is a trap-door which leads ou
 22 He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for the second time that night a startled, surprised look come ove
 23 “Holmes,” I said, in a whisper, “a child has done the horrid thing.”
 24 He had recovered his self-possession in an instant. “I was staggered for the moment,” he said, “but the thing is quite natura
 25 “What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?” I asked, eagerly, when we had regained the lower room once more.
 26 “My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself,” said he, with a touch of impatience. “You know my methods. Apply them, and
 27 “I cannot conceive anything which will cover the facts,” I answered.
 28 “It will be clear enough to you soon,” he said, in an off-hand way. “I think that there is nothing else of importance here, b
 29 “We are certainly in luck,” said he. “We ought to have very little trouble now. Number One has had the misfortune to tread in
 30 “What then?” I asked.
 31 “Why, we have got him, that’s all,” said he. “I know a dog that would follow that scent to the world’s end. If a pack can tra
 32 Heavy steps and the clamour of loud voices were audible from below, and the hall door shut with a loud crash.
 33 “Before they come,” said Holmes, “just put your hand here on this poor fellow’s arm, and here on his leg. What do you feel?”
 34 “The muscles are as hard as a board,” I answered.
 35 “Quite so. They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceeding the usual _rigor mortis_. Coupled with this distortion o
 36 “Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid,” I answered,—“some strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus.”
 37 “That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawn muscles of the face. On getting into the room I at once l
 38 I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It was long, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the poi
 39 “Is that an English thorn?” he asked.
 40 “No, it certainly is not.”
 41 “With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference. But here are the regulars; so the auxiliary forces may b
 42 As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly on the passage, and a very stout, portly man in a grey sui
 43 “Here’s a business!” he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. “Here’s a pretty business! But who are all these? Why, the house se
 44 “I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones,” said Holmes, quietly.
 45 “Why, of course I do!” he wheezed. “It’s Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the theorist. Remember you! I’ll never forget how you lectured
 46 “It was a piece of very simple reasoning.”
 47 “Oh, come, now, come! Never be ashamed to own up. But what is all this? Bad business! Bad business! Stern facts here,—no room
 48 “Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorise over,” said Holmes, dryly.
 49 “No, no. Still, we can’t deny that you hit the nail on the head sometimes. Dear me! Door locked, I understand. Jewels worth h
 50 “Fastened; but there are steps on the sill.”
 51 “Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do with the matter. That’s common sense. Man might have died
 52 “On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the door on the inside.”
 53 “Hum! There’s a flaw there. Let us apply common sense to the matter. This Thaddeus Sholto _was_ with his brother; there _was_
 54 “You are not quite in possession of the facts yet,” said Holmes. “This splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe
 55 “Confirms it in every respect,” said the fat detective, pompously. “House is full of Indian curiosities. Thaddeus brought thi
 56 “He can find something,” remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. “He has occasional glimmerings of reason. _Il n’y a pas de
 57 “You see!” said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again. “Facts are better than mere theories, after all. My view of
 58 “It was I who opened it.”
 59 “Oh, indeed! You did notice it, then?” He seemed a little crestfallen at the discovery. “Well, whoever noticed it, it shows h
 60 “Yes, sir,” from the passage.
 61 “Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.—Mr. Sholto, it is my duty to inform you that anything which you may say will be used agains
 62 “There, now! Didn’t I tell you!” cried the poor little man, throwing out his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.
 63 “Don’t trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto,” said Holmes. “I think that I can engage to clear you of the charge.”
 64 “Don’t promise too much, Mr. Theorist,—don’t promise too much!” snapped the detective. “You may find it a harder matter than
 65 “Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a free present of the name and description of one of the two peopl
 66 “Ah! the other man—?” asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, but impressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the p
 67 “Is a rather curious person,” said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon his heel. “I hope before very long to be able to introduce y
 68 He led me out to the head of the stair. “This unexpected occurrence,” he said, “has caused us rather to lose sight of the ori
 69 “I have just been thinking so,” I answered. “It is not right that Miss Morstan should remain in this stricken house.”
 70 “No. You must escort her home. She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester, in Lower Camberwell: so it is not very far. I will wait f
 71 “By no means. I don’t think I could rest until I know more of this fantastic business. I have seen something of the rough sid
 72 “Your presence will be of great service to me,” he answered. “We shall work the case out independently, and leave this fellow
 73 “A dog, I suppose.”
 74 “Yes,—a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent. I would rather have Toby’s help than that of the whole detective f
 75 “I shall bring him, then,” said I. “It is one now. I ought to be back before three, if I can get a fresh horse.”
 76 “And I,” said Holmes, “shall see what I can learn from Mrs. Bernstone, and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me

## Chapter VII — The Episode of the Barrel (4168 words; 80 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter VII The Episode of the Barrel
  1 The police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted Miss Morstan back to her home. After the angelic fashion of wo
  2 It was nearly two o’clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester’s. The servants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had
  3 And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker it grew. I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of ev
  4 Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in the lower quarter of Lambeth. I had to knock for some time at No
  5 “Go on, you drunken vagabone,” said the face. “If you kick up any more row I’ll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs
  6 “If you’ll let one out it’s just what I have come for,” said I.
  7 “Go on!” yelled the voice. “So help me gracious, I have a wiper in the bag, an’ I’ll drop it on your ’ead if you don’t hook i
  8 “But I want a dog,” I cried.
  9 “I won’t be argued with!” shouted Mr. Sherman. “Now stand clear, for when I say ‘three,’ down goes the wiper.”
 10 “Mr. Sherlock Holmes—” I began, but the words had a most magical effect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a
 11 “A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome,” said he. “Step in, sir. Keep clear of the badger; for he bites. Ah, naughty, na
 12 “He wanted a dog of yours.”
 13 “Ah! that would be Toby.”
 14 “Yes, Toby was the name.”
 15 “Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here.” He moved slowly forward with his candle among the queer animal family which he had ga
 16 Toby proved to be an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half spaniel and half lurcher, brown-and-white in colour, with a
 17 Holmes was standing on the door-step, with his hands in his pockets, smoking his pipe.
 18 “Ah, you have him there!” said he. “Good dog, then! Athelney Jones has gone. We have had an immense display of energy since y
 19 We tied Toby to the hall table, and re-ascended the stairs. The room was as he had left it, save that a sheet had been draped
 20 “Lend me your bull’s-eye, sergeant,” said my companion. “Now tie this bit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of
 21 We clambered up through the hole. Holmes turned his light once more upon the footsteps in the dust.
 22 “I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks,” he said. “Do you observe anything noteworthy about them?”
 23 “They belong,” I said, “to a child or a small woman.”
 24 “Apart from their size, though. Is there nothing else?”
 25 “They appear to be much as other footmarks.”
 26 “Not at all. Look here! This is the print of a right foot in the dust. Now I make one with my naked foot beside it. What is t
 27 “Your toes are all cramped together. The other print has each toe distinctly divided.”
 28 “Quite so. That is the point. Bear that in mind. Now, would you kindly step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of th
 29 I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarry smell.
 30 “That is where he put his foot in getting out. If _you_ can trace him, I should think that Toby will have no difficulty. Now
 31 By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was on the roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm c
 32 “That you, Watson?” he cried.
 33 “Yes.”
 34 “This is the place. What is that black thing down there?”
 35 “A water-barrel.”
 36 “Top on it?”
 37 “Yes.”
 38 “No sign of a ladder?”
 39 “No.”
 40 “Confound the fellow! It’s a most break-neck place. I ought to be able to come down where he could climb up. The water-pipe f
 41 There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadily down the side of the wall. Then with a light spring he
 42 “It was easy to follow him,” he said, drawing on his stockings and boots. “Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in hi
 43 The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven out of coloured grasses and with a few tawdry beads strun
 44 “They are hellish things,” said he. “Look out that you don’t prick yourself. I’m delighted to have them, for the chances are
 45 “Certainly,” I answered.
 46 “Your leg will stand it?”
 47 “Oh, yes.”
 48 “Here you are, doggy! Good old Toby! Smell it, Toby, smell it!” He pushed the creasote handkerchief under the dog’s nose, whi
 49 The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see some distance in the cold grey light. The square, massive house,
 50 On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly, underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screene
 51 “There’s the print of wooden-leg’s hand,” he remarked, as I mounted up beside him. “You see the slight smudge of blood upon t
 52 I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the great traffic which had passed along the London road in the i
 53 “Do not imagine,” said Holmes, “that I depend for my success in this case upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having
 54 “There is credit, and to spare,” said I. “I assure you, Holmes, that I marvel at the means by which you obtain your results i
 55 “Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself. I don’t wish to be theatrical. It is all patent and above-board. Two officers
 56 “But that is mere speculation,” said I.
 57 “It is more than that. It is the only hypothesis which covers the facts. Let us see how it fits in with the sequel. Major Sho
 58 “A letter to say that the men whom he had wronged had been set free.”
 59 “Or had escaped. That is much more likely, for he would have known what their term of imprisonment was. It would not have bee
 60 “No: it is clear and concise.”
 61 “Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. Let us look at it from his point of view. He comes to Englan
 62 “Very clearly.”
 63 “Now, what could Jonathan Small do? He could only continue to keep a secret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure.
 64 “But it was the associate, and not Jonathan, who committed the crime.”
 65 “Quite so. And rather to Jonathan’s disgust, to judge by the way he stamped about when he got into the room. He bore no grudg
 66 “The associate?”
 67 “Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that. But you will know all about it soon enough. How sweet the morning air is! See h
 68 “Fairly so. I worked back to him through Carlyle.”
 69 “That was like following the brook to the parent lake. He makes one curious but profound remark. It is that the chief proof o
 70 “I have my stick.”
 71 “It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we get to their lair. Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if th
 72 We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down the half-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropoli
 73 We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now found ourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through the si
 74 “What the deuce is the matter with the dog?” growled Holmes. “They surely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon.”
 75 “Perhaps they stood here for some time,” I suggested.
 76 “Ah! it’s all right. He’s off again,” said my companion, in a tone of relief.
 77 He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made up his mind, and darted away with an energy and determinat
 78 Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and Nelson’s large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern
 79 Sherlock Holmes and I looked blankly at each other, and then burst simultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.

## Chapter VIII — The Baker Street Irregulars (3331 words; 83 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter VIII The Baker Street Irregulars
  1 “What now?” I asked. “Toby has lost his character for infallibility.”
  2 “He acted according to his lights,” said Holmes, lifting him down from the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard. “If
  3 “We must get on the main scent again, I suppose.”
  4 “Yes. And, fortunately, we have no distance to go. Evidently what puzzled the dog at the corner of Knight’s Place was that th
  5 There was no difficulty about this. On leading Toby to the place where he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide ci
  6 “We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place where the creasote-barrel came from,” I observed.
  7 “I had thought of that. But you notice that he keeps on the pavement, whereas the barrel passed down the roadway. No, we are
  8 It tended down towards the river-side, running through Belmont Place and Prince’s Street. At the end of Broad Street it ran r
  9 “We are out of luck,” said Holmes. “They have taken to a boat here.” Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the w
 10 Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with a wooden placard slung out through the second window. “Mordecai
 11 “This looks bad,” said he. “These fellows are sharper than I expected. They seem to have covered their tracks. There has, I f
 12 He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and a little, curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by
 13 “You come back and be washed, Jack,” she shouted. “Come back, you young imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like
 14 “Dear little chap!” said Holmes, strategically. “What a rosy-cheeked young rascal! Now, Jack, is there anything you would lik
 15 The youth pondered for a moment. “I’d like a shillin’,” said he.
 16 “Nothing you would like better?”
 17 “I’d like two shillin’ better,” the prodigy answered, after some thought.
 18 “Here you are, then! Catch!—A fine child, Mrs. Smith!”
 19 “Lor’ bless you, sir, he is that, and forward. He gets a’most too much for me to manage, ’specially when my man is away days
 20 “Away, is he?” said Holmes, in a disappointed voice. “I am sorry for that, for I wanted to speak to Mr. Smith.”
 21 “He’s been away since yesterday mornin’, sir, and, truth to tell, I am beginnin’ to feel frightened about him. But if it was
 22 “I wanted to hire his steam launch.”
 23 “Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone. That’s what puzzles me; for I know there ain’t more coals i
 24 “He might have bought some at a wharf down the river.”
 25 “He might, sir, but it weren’t his way. Many a time I’ve heard him call out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags. Bes
 26 “A wooden-legged man?” said Holmes, with bland surprise.
 27 “Yes, sir, a brown, monkey-faced chap that’s called more’n once for my old man. It was him that roused him up yesternight, an
 28 “But, my dear Mrs. Smith,” said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, “You are frightening yourself about nothing. How could you p
 29 “His voice, sir. I knew his voice, which is kind o’ thick and foggy. He tapped at the winder,—about three it would be. ‘Show
 30 “And was this wooden-legged man alone?”
 31 “Couldn’t say, I am sure, sir. I didn’t hear no one else.”
 32 “I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I have heard good reports of the—Let me see, what is her name?”
 33 “The _Aurora_, sir.”
 34 “Ah! She’s not that old green launch with a yellow line, very broad in the beam?”
 35 “No, indeed. She’s as trim a little thing as any on the river. She’s been fresh painted, black with two red streaks.”
 36 “Thanks. I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith. I am going down the river; and if I should see anything of the _Auror
 37 “No, sir. Black with a white band.”
 38 “Ah, of course. It was the sides which were black. Good-morning, Mrs. Smith.—There is a boatman here with a wherry, Watson. W
 39 “The main thing with people of that sort,” said Holmes, as we sat in the sheets of the wherry, “is never to let them think th
 40 “Our course now seems pretty clear,” said I.
 41 “What would you do, then?”
 42 “I would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of the _Aurora_.”
 43 “My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task. She may have touched at any wharf on either side of the stream between here and
 44 “Employ the police, then.”
 45 “No. I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment. He is not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything
 46 “Could we advertise, then, asking for information from wharfingers?”
 47 “Worse and worse! Our men would know that the chase was hot at their heels, and they would be off out of the country. As it i
 48 “What are we to do, then?” I asked, as we landed near Millbank Penitentiary.
 49 “Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour’s sleep. It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to
 50 We pulled up at the Great Peter Street post-office, and Holmes despatched his wire. “Whom do you think that is to?” he asked,
 51 “I am sure I don’t know.”
 52 “You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police force whom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?”
 53 “Well,” said I, laughing.
 54 “This is just the case where they might be invaluable. If they fail, I have other resources; but I shall try them first. That
 55 It was between eight and nine o’clock now, and I was conscious of a strong reaction after the successive excitements of the n
 56 A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me up wonderfully. When I came down to our room I found the breakfast
 57 “Here it is,” said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper. “The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fix
 58 I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed “Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood.”
 59 “About twelve o’clock last night,” said the _Standard_, “Mr. Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was fou
 60 “Isn’t it gorgeous!” said Holmes, grinning over his coffee-cup. “What do you think of it?”
 61 “I think that we have had a close shave ourselves of being arrested for the crime.”
 62 “So do I. I wouldn’t answer for our safety now, if he should happen to have another of his attacks of energy.”
 63 At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hear Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail of
 64 “By heaven, Holmes,” I said, half rising, “I believe that they are really after us.”
 65 “No, it’s not quite so bad as that. It is the unofficial force,—the Baker Street irregulars.”
 66 As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon the stairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirt
 67 “Got your message, sir,” said he, “and brought ’em on sharp. Three bob and a tanner for tickets.”
 68 “Here you are,” said Holmes, producing some silver. “In future they can report to you, Wiggins, and you to me. I cannot have
 69 “Yes, guv’nor,” said Wiggins.
 70 “The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat. Here’s a day in advance. Now off you go!” He handed them a
 71 “If the launch is above water they will find her,” said Holmes, as he rose from the table and lit his pipe. “They can go ever
 72 “Toby could eat these scraps, I dare say. Are you going to bed, Holmes?”
 73 “No; I am not tired. I have a curious constitution. I never remember feeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me compl
 74 “That other man again!”
 75 “I have no wish to make a mystery of him,—to you, anyway. But you must have formed your own opinion. Now, do consider the dat
 76 “A savage!” I exclaimed. “Perhaps one of those Indians who were the associates of Jonathan Small.”
 77 “Hardly that,” said he. “When first I saw signs of strange weapons I was inclined to think so; but the remarkable character o
 78 “South American,” I hazarded.
 79 He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from the shelf. “This is the first volume of a gazetteer which is now
 80 “But how came he to have so singular a companion?”
 81 “Ah, that is more than I can tell. Since, however, we had already determined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not
 82 He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out he began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,—his ow

## Chapter IX — A Break in the Chain (3618 words; 99 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter IX A Break in the Chain
  1 It was late in the afternoon before I woke, strengthened and refreshed. Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him,
  2 “You have slept soundly,” he said. “I feared that our talk would wake you.”
  3 “I heard nothing,” I answered. “Have you had fresh news, then?”
  4 “Unfortunately, no. I confess that I am surprised and disappointed. I expected something definite by this time. Wiggins has j
  5 “Can I do anything? I am perfectly fresh now, and quite ready for another night’s outing.”
  6 “No, we can do nothing. We can only wait. If we go ourselves, the message might come in our absence, and delay be caused. You
  7 “Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. Cecil Forrester. She asked me to, yesterday.”
  8 “On Mrs. Cecil Forrester?” asked Holmes, with the twinkle of a smile in his eyes.
  9 “Well, of course Miss Morstan too. They were anxious to hear what happened.”
 10 “I would not tell them too much,” said Holmes. “Women are never to be entirely trusted,—not the best of them.”
 11 I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment. “I shall be back in an hour or two,” I remarked.
 12 “All right! Good luck! But, I say, if you are crossing the river you may as well return Toby, for I don’t think it is at all
 13 I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with a half-sovereign, at the old naturalist’s in Pinchin Lane. At Cam
 14 “It is a romance!” cried Mrs. Forrester. “An injured lady, half a million in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged
 15 “And two knight-errants to the rescue,” added Miss Morstan, with a bright glance at me.
 16 “Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search. I don’t think that you are nearly excited enough. Just imagin
 17 It sent a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showed no sign of elation at the prospect. On the contrary, she
 18 “It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious,” she said. “Nothing else is of any consequence; but I think that he has beh
 19 It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time I reached home. My companion’s book and pipe lay by his c
 20 “I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out,” I said to Mrs. Hudson as she came up to lower the blinds.
 21 “No, sir. He has gone to his room, sir. Do you know, sir,” sinking her voice into an impressive whisper, “I am afraid for his
 22 “Why so, Mrs. Hudson?”
 23 “Well, he’s that strange, sir. After you was gone he walked and he walked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of
 24 “I don’t think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson,” I answered. “I have seen him like this before. He has some
 25 At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck of feverish colour upon either cheek.
 26 “You are knocking yourself up, old man,” I remarked. “I heard you marching about in the night.”
 27 “No, I could not sleep,” he answered. “This infernal problem is consuming me. It is too much to be balked by so petty an obst
 28 “Or that Mrs. Smith has put us on a wrong scent.”
 29 “No, I think that may be dismissed. I had inquiries made, and there is a launch of that description.”
 30 “Could it have gone up the river?”
 31 “I have considered that possibility too, and there is a search-party who will work up as far as Richmond. If no news comes to
 32 We did not, however. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins or from the other agencies. There were articles in most of the
 33 In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find him standing by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with
 34 “I am off down the river, Watson,” said he. “I have been turning it over in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it. It
 35 “Surely I can come with you, then?” said I.
 36 “No; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as my representative. I am loath to go, for it is quite on the cards
 37 “Most certainly.”
 38 “I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I can hardly tell yet where I may find myself. If I am in luck, how
 39 I had heard nothing of him by breakfast-time. On opening the _Standard_, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to
 40 “That is satisfactory so far as it goes,” thought I. “Friend Sholto is safe, at any rate. I wonder what the fresh clue may be
 41 I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eye caught an advertisement in the agony column. It ran in this
 42 “Lost.—Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, left Smith’s Wharf at or about three o’clock last Tuesday morning i
 43 This was clearly Holmes’s doing. The Baker Street address was enough to prove that. It struck me as rather ingenious, because
 44 It was a long day. Every time that a knock came to the door, or a sharp step passed in the street, I imagined that it was eit
 45 At three o’clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell, an authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise,
 46 “Good-day, sir; good-day,” said he. “Mr. Sherlock Holmes is out, I understand.”
 47 “Yes, and I cannot be sure when he will be back. But perhaps you would care to wait. Take that chair and try one of these cig
 48 “Thank you; I don’t mind if I do,” said he, mopping his face with a red bandanna handkerchief.
 49 “And a whiskey-and-soda?”
 50 “Well, half a glass. It is very hot for the time of year; and I have had a good deal to worry and try me. You know my theory
 51 “I remember that you expressed one.”
 52 “Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it. I had my net drawn tightly round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop he went through a hol
 53 “We all need help sometimes,” said I.
 54 “Your friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes is a wonderful man, sir,” said he, in a husky and confidential voice. “He’s a man who is not
 55 He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me. It was dated from Poplar at twelve o’clock. “Go to Baker Street
 56 “This sounds well. He has evidently picked up the scent again,” said I.
 57 “Ah, then he has been at fault too,” exclaimed Jones, with evident satisfaction. “Even the best of us are thrown off sometime
 58 A heavy step was heard ascending the stair, with a great wheezing and rattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for bre
 59 “What is it, my man?” I asked.
 60 He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age.
 61 “Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?” said he.
 62 “No; but I am acting for him. You can tell me any message you have for him.”
 63 “It was to him himself I was to tell it,” said he.
 64 “But I tell you that I am acting for him. Was it about Mordecai Smith’s boat?”
 65 “Yes. I knows well where it is. An’ I knows where the men he is after are. An’ I knows where the treasure is. I knows all abo
 66 “Then tell me, and I shall let him know.”
 67 “It was to him I was to tell it,” he repeated, with the petulant obstinacy of a very old man.
 68 “Well, you must wait for him.”
 69 “No, no; I ain’t goin’ to lose a whole day to please no one. If Mr. Holmes ain’t here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out f
 70 He shuffled towards the door, but Athelney Jones got in front of him.
 71 “Wait a bit, my friend,” said he. “You have important information, and you must not walk off. We shall keep you, whether you
 72 The old man made a little run towards the door, but, as Athelney Jones put his broad back up against it, he recognised the us
 73 “Pretty sort o’ treatment this!” he cried, stamping his stick. “I come here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw
 74 “You will be none the worse,” I said. “We shall recompense you for the loss of your time. Sit over here on the sofa, and you
 75 He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his face resting on his hands. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our
 76 “I think that you might offer me a cigar too,” he said.
 77 We both started in our chairs. There was Holmes sitting close to us with an air of quiet amusement.
 78 “Holmes!” I exclaimed. “You here! But where is the old man?”
 79 “Here is the old man,” said he, holding out a heap of white hair. “Here he is,—wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all. I thought my
 80 “Ah, You rogue!” cried Jones, highly delighted. “You would have made an actor, and a rare one. You had the proper workhouse c
 81 “I have been working in that get-up all day,” said he, lighting his cigar. “You see, a good many of the criminal classes begi
 82 “Yes; that was what brought me here.”
 83 “How has your case prospered?”
 84 “It has all come to nothing. I have had to release two of my prisoners, and there is no evidence against the other two.”
 85 “Never mind. We shall give you two others in the place of them. But you must put yourself under my orders. You are welcome to
 86 “Entirely, if you will help me to the men.”
 87 “Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat—a steam launch—to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o’clo
 88 “That is easily managed. There is always one about there; but I can step across the road and telephone to make sure.”
 89 “Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance.”
 90 “There will be two or three in the boat. What else?”
 91 “When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. I think that it would be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box roun
 92 “It would be a great pleasure to me.”
 93 “Rather an irregular proceeding,” said Jones, shaking his head. “However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must
 94 “Certainly. That is easily managed. One other point. I should much like to have a few details about this matter from the lips
 95 “Well, you are master of the situation. I have had no proof yet of the existence of this Jonathan Small. However, if you can
 96 “That is understood, then?”
 97 “Perfectly. Is there anything else?”
 98 “Only that I insist upon your dining with us. It will be ready in half an hour. I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with so

## Chapter X — The End of the Islander (3337 words; 49 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter X The End of the Islander
  1 Our meal was a merry one. Holmes could talk exceedingly well when he chose, and that night he did choose. He appeared to be i
  2 When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at his watch, and filled up three glasses with port. “One bumper,” said he, “to th
  3 “I have my old service-revolver in my desk.”
  4 “You had best take it, then. It is well to be prepared. I see that the cab is at the door. I ordered it for half-past six.”
  5 It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf, and found our launch awaiting us. Holmes eyed it critical
  6 “Is there anything to mark it as a police-boat?”
  7 “Yes,—that green lamp at the side.”
  8 “Then take it off.”
  9 The small change was made, we stepped on board, and the ropes were cast off. Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern. There was
 10 “Where to?” asked Jones.
 11 “To the Tower. Tell them to stop opposite Jacobson’s Yard.”
 12 Our craft was evidently a very fast one. We shot past the long lines of loaded barges as though they were stationary. Holmes
 13 “We ought to be able to catch anything on the river,” he said.
 14 “Well, hardly that. But there are not many launches to beat us.”
 15 “We shall have to catch the _Aurora_, and she has a name for being a clipper. I will tell you how the land lies, Watson. You
 16 “Yes.”
 17 “Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemical analysis. One of our greatest statesmen has said that a cha
 18 “It seems to me to be a little weak,” said I. “It is more probable that he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out up
 19 “No, I hardly think so. This lair of his would be too valuable a retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was s
 20 “But the launch? They could not have taken that to their lodgings.”
 21 “Quite so. I argued that the launch must be no great way off, in spite of its invisibility. I then put myself in the place of
 22 “That seems simple enough.”
 23 “It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be overlooked. However, I determined to act on the idea. I
 24 “You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right men or not,” said Jones; “but if the affair were in my hands
 25 “Which would have been never. This man Small is a pretty shrewd fellow. He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made
 26 “But you might have stuck to Mordecai Smith, and so been led to their hiding-place,” said I.
 27 “In that case I should have wasted my day. I think that it is a hundred to one against Smith knowing where they live. As long
 28 While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting the long series of bridges which span the Thames. As we pas
 29 “That is Jacobson’s Yard,” said Holmes, pointing to a bristle of masts and rigging on the Surrey side. “Cruise gently up and
 30 “Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them,” said Jones, eagerly. We were all eager by this time, even t
 31 “We have no right to take anything for granted,” Holmes answered. “It is certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but w
 32 “They are coming from work in the yard.”
 33 “Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some little immortal spark concealed about him. You would not think it, t
 34 “Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal,” I suggested.
 35 “Winwood Reade is good upon the subject,” said Holmes. “He remarks that, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in
 36 “Yes, it is your boy,” I cried. “I can see him plainly.”
 37 “And there is the _Aurora_,” exclaimed Holmes, “and going like the devil! Full speed ahead, engineer. Make after that launch
 38 She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behind two or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her s
 39 “She is very fast,” he said. “I doubt if we shall catch her.”
 40 “We _must_ catch her!” cried Holmes, between his teeth. “Heap it on, stokers! Make her do all she can! If we burn the boat we
 41 We were fairly after her now. The furnaces roared, and the powerful engines whizzed and clanked, like a great metallic heart.
 42 “Pile it on, men, pile it on!” cried Holmes, looking down into the engine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon hi
 43 “I think we gain a little,” said Jones, with his eyes on the _Aurora_.
 44 “I am sure of it,” said I. “We shall be up with her in a very few minutes.”
 45 At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug with three barges in tow blundered in between us. It was only
 46 “Fire if he raises his hand,” said Holmes, quietly. We were within a boat’s-length by this time, and almost within touch of o
 47 It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Even as we looked he plucked out from under his covering a short, round piece
 48 “See here,” said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway. “We were hardly quick enough with our pistols.” There, sure enough,

## Chapter XI — The Great Agra Treasure (2194 words; 42 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter XI The Great Agra Treasure
  1 Our captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he had done so much and waited so long to gain. He was a sunburne
  2 “Well, Jonathan Small,” said Holmes, lighting a cigar, “I am sorry that it has come to this.”
  3 “And so am I, sir,” he answered, frankly. “I don’t believe that I can swing over the job. I give you my word on the book that
  4 “Have a cigar,” said Holmes; “and you had best take a pull out of my flask, for you are very wet. How could you expect so sma
  5 “You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir. The truth is that I hoped to find the room clear. I knew the ha
  6 “You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard. He is going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask y
  7 “That he was, sir. I never got such a turn in my life as when I saw him grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I cli
  8 At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavy shoulders into the tiny cabin. “Quite a family party,” he remar
  9 “All is well that ends well,” said Holmes. “But I certainly did not know that the _Aurora_ was such a clipper.”
 10 “Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and that if he had had another man to help him with the engines
 11 “Neither he did,” cried our prisoner,—“not a word. I chose his launch because I heard that she was a flier. We told him nothi
 12 “Well, if he has done no wrong we shall see that no wrong comes to him. If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are no
 13 “We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently,” said Jones, “and shall land you, Dr. Watson, with the treasure-box. I need hardly
 14 “Yes, I shall drive.”
 15 “It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first. You will have to break it open. Where is the key, my man?
 16 “At the bottom of the river,” said Small, shortly.
 17 “Hum! There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble. We have had work enough already through you. However, doctor, I
 18 They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff, genial inspector as my companion. A quarter of an hour’
 19 She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of white diaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet at the n
 20 “I heard a cab drive up,” she said. “I thought that Mrs. Forrester had come back very early, but I never dreamed that it migh
 21 “I have brought something better than news,” said I, putting down the box upon the table and speaking jovially and boisterous
 22 She glanced at the iron box. “Is that the treasure, then?” she asked, coolly enough.
 23 “Yes, this is the great Agra treasure. Half of it is yours and half is Thaddeus Sholto’s. You will have a couple of hundred t
 24 I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and that she detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I
 25 “If I have it,” said she, “I owe it to you.”
 26 “No, no,” I answered, “not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes. With all the will in the world, I could never have follow
 27 “Pray sit down and tell me all about it, Dr. Watson,” said she.
 28 I narrated briefly what had occurred since I had seen her last,—Holmes’s new method of search, the discovery of the _Aurora_,
 29 “It is nothing,” she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water. “I am all right again. It was a shock to me to hear that
 30 “That is all over,” I answered. “It was nothing. I will tell you no more gloomy details. Let us turn to something brighter. T
 31 “It would be of the greatest interest to me,” she said. There was no eagerness in her voice, however. It had struck her, doub
 32 “What a pretty box!” she said, stooping over it. “This is Indian work, I suppose?”
 33 “Yes; it is Benares metal-work.”
 34 “And so heavy!” she exclaimed, trying to raise it. “The box alone must be of some value. Where is the key?”
 35 “Small threw it into the Thames,” I answered. “I must borrow Mrs. Forrester’s poker.” There was in the front a thick and broa
 36 No wonder that it was heavy. The iron-work was two-thirds of an inch thick all round. It was massive, well made, and solid, l
 37 “The treasure is lost,” said Miss Morstan, calmly.
 38 As I listened to the words and realised what they meant, a great shadow seemed to pass from my soul. I did not know how this
 39 She looked at me with a quick, questioning smile. “Why do you say that?” she asked.
 40 “Because you are within my reach again,” I said, taking her hand. She did not withdraw it. “Because I love you, Mary, as trul
 41 “Then I say, ‘Thank God,’ too,” she whispered, as I drew her to my side. Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that

## Chapter XII — The Strange Story of Jonathan Small (10308 words; 129 paragraphs)
  0 Chapter XII The Strange Story of Jonathan Small
  1 A very patient man was that inspector in the cab, for it was a weary time before I rejoined him. His face clouded over when I
  2 “There goes the reward!” said he, gloomily. “Where there is no money there is no pay. This night’s work would have been worth
  3 “Mr. Thaddeus Sholto is a rich man,” I said. “He will see that you are rewarded, treasure or no.”
  4 The inspector shook his head despondently, however. “It’s a bad job,” he repeated; “and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think.”
  5 His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blank enough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty
  6 “This is your doing, Small,” said Athelney Jones, angrily.
  7 “Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it,” he cried, exultantly. “It is my treasure; and if I can’t ha
  8 “You are deceiving us, Small,” said Athelney Jones, sternly. “If you had wished to throw the treasure into the Thames it woul
  9 “Easier for me to throw, and easier for you to recover,” he answered, with a shrewd, sidelong look. “The man that was clever
 10 “This is a very serious matter, Small,” said the detective. “If you had helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way,
 11 “Justice!” snarled the ex-convict. “A pretty justice! Whose loot is this, if it is not ours? Where is the justice that I shou
 12 “You forget that we know nothing of all this,” said Holmes quietly. “We have not heard your story, and we cannot tell how far
 13 “Well, sir, you have been very fair-spoken to me, though I can see that I have you to thank that I have these bracelets upon
 14 “I am a Worcestershire man myself,—born near Pershore. I dare say you would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you wer
 15 “I wasn’t destined to do much soldiering, however. I had just got past the goose-step, and learned to handle my musket, when
 16 “I was, as you can imagine, pretty down on my luck at this time, for I was a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth y
 17 “Well, I was never in luck’s way long. Suddenly, without a note of warning, the great mutiny broke upon us. One month India l
 18 “As it proved, however, there was no great safety there, either. The whole country was up like a swarm of bees. Wherever the
 19 “Nothing but the worst news came to us from every side,—which is not to be wondered at, for if you look at the map you will s
 20 “The city of Agra is a great place, swarming with fanatics and fierce devil-worshippers of all sorts. Our handful of men were
 21 “The river washes along the front of the old fort, and so protects it, but on the sides and behind there are many doors, and
 22 “Well, I was pretty proud at having this small command given me, since I was a raw recruit, and a game-legged one at that. Fo
 23 “The third night of my watch was dark and dirty, with a small, driving rain. It was dreary work standing in the gateway hour
 24 “My first thought was that these fellows were in league with the rebels, and that this was the beginning of an assault. If ou
 25 “‘Listen to me, Sahib,’ said the taller and fiercer of the pair, the one whom they called Abdullah Khan. ‘You must either be
 26 “‘How can I decide?’ said I. ‘You have not told me what you want of me. But I tell you now that if it is anything against the
 27 “‘It is nothing against the fort,’ said he. ‘We only ask you to do that which your countrymen come to this land for. We ask y
 28 “‘But what is the treasure, then?’ I asked. ‘I am as ready to be rich as you can be, if you will but show me how it can be do
 29 “‘You will swear, then,’ said he, ‘by the bones of your father, by the honour of your mother, by the cross of your faith, to
 30 “‘I will swear it,’ I answered, ‘provided that the fort is not endangered.’
 31 “‘Then my comrade and I will swear that you shall have a quarter of the treasure which shall be equally divided among the fou
 32 “‘There are but three,’ said I.
 33 “‘No; Dost Akbar must have his share. We can tell the tale to you while we await them. Do you stand at the gate, Mahomet Sing
 34 “‘There is a rajah in the northern provinces who has much wealth, though his lands are small. Much has come to him from his f
 35 “‘This pretended merchant, who travels under the name of Achmet, is now in the city of Agra, and desires to gain his way into
 36 “In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacred thing; but it is very different when there is fire and blood
 37 “‘Consider, Sahib,’ said he, ‘that if this man is taken by the commandant he will be hung or shot, and his jewels taken by th
 38 “‘I am with you heart and soul,’ said I.
 39 “‘It is well,’ he answered, handing me back my firelock. ‘You see that we trust you, for your word, like ours, is not to be b
 40 “‘Does your brother know, then, of what you will do?’ I asked.
 41 “‘The plan is his. He has devised it. We will go to the gate and share the watch with Mahomet Singh.’
 42 “The rain was still falling steadily, for it was just the beginning of the wet season. Brown, heavy clouds were drifting acro
 43 “Suddenly my eye caught the glint of a shaded lantern at the other side of the moat. It vanished among the mound-heaps, and t
 44 “‘Here they are!’ I exclaimed.
 45 “‘You will challenge him, Sahib, as usual,’ whispered Abdullah. ‘Give him no cause for fear. Send us in with him, and we shal
 46 “The light had flickered onwards, now stopping and now advancing, until I could see two dark figures upon the other side of t
 47 “‘Who goes there?’ said I, in a subdued voice.
 48 “‘Friends,’ came the answer. I uncovered my lantern and threw a flood of light upon them. The first was an enormous Sikh, wit
 49 “‘Your protection, Sahib,’ he panted,—‘your protection for the unhappy merchant Achmet. I have travelled across Rajpootana th
 50 “‘What have you in the bundle?’ I asked.
 51 “‘An iron box,’ he answered, ‘which contains one or two little family matters which are of no value to others, but which I sh
 52 “I could not trust myself to speak longer with the man. The more I looked at his fat, frightened face, the harder did it seem
 53 “‘Take him to the main guard,’ said I. The two Sikhs closed in upon him on each side, and the giant walked behind, while they
 54 “I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding through the lonely corridors. Suddenly it ceased, and I heard vo
 55 He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-water which Holmes had brewed for him. For myself, I confess
 56 “It was all very bad, no doubt,” said he. “I should like to know how many fellows in my shoes would have refused a share of t
 57 “Go on with your story,” said Holmes, shortly.
 58 “Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. A fine weight he was, too, for all that he was so short. Mahomet Singh was
 59 “It lay where he had dropped it when he was first attacked. The box was the same which now lies open upon your table. A key w
 60 “After we had counted our treasures we put them back into the chest and carried them to the gateway to show them to Mahomet S
 61 “Well, there’s no use my telling you gentlemen what came of the Indian mutiny. After Wilson took Delhi and Sir Colin relieved
 62 “It came about in this way. When the rajah put his jewels into the hands of Achmet he did it because he knew that he was a tr
 63 “It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then. There we were all four tied by the leg and with precious lit
 64 “At last it seemed to me to have come. I was changed from Agra to Madras, and from there to Blair Island in the Andamans. The
 65 “The surgeon, Dr. Somerton, was a fast, sporting young chap, and the other young officers would meet in his rooms of an eveni
 66 “Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that was that the soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to
 67 “One night he lost even more heavily than usual. I was sitting in my hut when he and Captain Morstan came stumbling along on
 68 “‘It’s all up, Morstan,’ he was saying, as they passed my hut. ‘I shall have to send in my papers. I am a ruined man.’
 69 “‘Nonsense, old chap!’ said the other, slapping him upon the shoulder. ‘I’ve had a nasty facer myself, but—’ That was all I c
 70 “A couple of days later Major Sholto was strolling on the beach: so I took the chance of speaking to him.
 71 “‘I wish to have your advice, major,’ said I.
 72 “‘Well, Small, what is it?’ he asked, taking his cheroot from his lips.
 73 “‘I wanted to ask you, sir,’ said I, ‘who is the proper person to whom hidden treasure should be handed over. I know where ha
 74 “‘Half a million, Small?’ he gasped, looking hard at me to see if I was in earnest.
 75 “‘Quite that, sir,—in jewels and pearls. It lies there ready for any one. And the queer thing about it is that the real owner
 76 “‘To government, Small,’ he stammered,—‘to government.’ But he said it in a halting fashion, and I knew in my heart that I ha
 77 “‘You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to the Governor-General?’ said I, quietly.
 78 “‘Well, well, you must not do anything rash, or that you might repent. Let me hear all about it, Small. Give me the facts.’
 79 “I told him the whole story, with small changes so that he could not identify the places. When I had finished he stood stock
 80 “‘This is a very important matter, Small,’ he said, at last. ‘You must not say a word to any one about it, and I shall see yo
 81 “Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut in the dead of the night with a lantern.
 82 “‘I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from your own lips, Small,’ said he.
 83 “I repeated it as I had told it before.
 84 “‘It rings true, eh?’ said he. ‘It’s good enough to act upon?’
 85 “Captain Morstan nodded.
 86 “‘Look here, Small,’ said the major. ‘We have been talking it over, my friend here and I, and we have come to the conclusion
 87 “‘Why, as to that, gentlemen,’ I answered, trying also to be cool, but feeling as excited as he did, ‘there is only one barga
 88 “‘Hum!’ said he. ‘A fifth share! That is not very tempting.’
 89 “‘It would come to fifty thousand apiece,’ said I.
 90 “‘But how can we gain your freedom? You know very well that you ask an impossibility.’
 91 “‘Nothing of the sort,’ I answered. ‘I have thought it all out to the last detail. The only bar to our escape is that we can
 92 “‘If there were only one,’ he said.
 93 “‘None or all,’ I answered. ‘We have sworn it. The four of us must always act together.’
 94 “‘You see, Morstan,’ said he, ‘Small is a man of his word. He does not flinch from his friend. I think we may very well trust
 95 “‘It’s a dirty business,’ the other answered. ‘Yet, as you say, the money would save our commissions handsomely.’
 96 “‘Well, Small,’ said the major, ‘we must, I suppose, try and meet you. We must first, of course, test the truth of your story
 97 “‘Not so fast,’ said I, growing colder as he got hot. ‘I must have the consent of my three comrades. I tell you that it is fo
 98 “‘Nonsense!’ he broke in. ‘What have three black fellows to do with our agreement?’
 99 “‘Black or blue,’ said I, ‘they are in with me, and we all go together.’
100 “Well, the matter ended by a second meeting, at which Mahomet Singh, Abdullah Khan, and Dost Akbar were all present. We talke
101 “Well, gentlemen, I weary you with my long story, and I know that my friend Mr. Jones is impatient to get me safely stowed in
102 “Well, I have set my mind on many things in this life, and never one which I did not carry out. But it was weary years before
103 “Tonga—for that was his name—was a fine boatman, and owned a big, roomy canoe of his own. When I found that he was devoted to
104 “He was stanch and true, was little Tonga. No man ever had a more faithful mate. At the night named he had his boat at the wh
105 “Well, if I were to tell you all the adventures that my little chum and I went through, you would not thank me, for I would h
106 “One day, however, I got word that he was dying. I hurried at once to the garden, mad that he should slip out of my clutches
107 “We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairs and other such places as the black cannibal. He would e
108 “I don’t know that I have anything else to tell you. I had heard a waterman speak of the speed of Smith’s launch the _Aurora_
109 “A very remarkable account,” said Sherlock Holmes. “A fitting wind-up to an extremely interesting case. There is nothing at a
110 “He had lost them all, sir, except the one which was in his blow-pipe at the time.”
111 “Ah, of course,” said Holmes. “I had not thought of that.”
112 “Is there any other point which you would like to ask about?” asked the convict, affably.
113 “I think not, thank you,” my companion answered.
114 “Well, Holmes,” said Athelney Jones, “You are a man to be humoured, and we all know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but
115 “Good-night, gentlemen both,” said Jonathan Small.
116 “You first, Small,” remarked the wary Jones as they left the room. “I’ll take particular care that you don’t club me with you
117 “Well, and there is the end of our little drama,” I remarked, after we had set some time smoking in silence. “I fear that it
118 He gave a most dismal groan. “I feared as much,” said he. “I really cannot congratulate you.”
119 I was a little hurt. “Have you any reason to be dissatisfied with my choice?” I asked.
120 “Not at all. I think she is one of the most charming young ladies I ever met, and might have been most useful in such work as
121 “I trust,” said I, laughing, “that my judgment may survive the ordeal. But you look weary.”
122 “Yes, the reaction is already upon me. I shall be as limp as a rag for a week.”
123 “Strange,” said I, “how terms of what in another man I should call laziness alternate with your fits of splendid energy and v
124 “Yes,” he answered, “there are in me the makings of a very fine loafer and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow. I often thin
125 Schade dass die Natur nur _einen_ Mensch aus Dir schuf, Denn zum würdigen Mann war und zum Schelmen der Stoff.
126 “By the way, _à propos_ of this Norwood business, you see that they had, as I surmised, a confederate in the house, who could
127 “The division seems rather unfair,” I remarked. “You have done all the work in this business. I get a wife out of it, Jones g
128 “For me,” said Sherlock Holmes, “there still remains the cocaine-bottle.” And he stretched his long white hand up for it.
